Welcome back in in this lesson we're going to be looking at the do while loop.
So basically a loop allows you to execute a block of code a number of times and you can set the parameters
for that.
So let's set up our first loop and loops.
Save us time.
So this one is called a do loop.
And there are a number of different ways to do the loops.
So I want to show you the different ways to get and execute the loops.
And there's also different rationale for doing them in all these ways.
But they all do need three different expressions.
And I'm going to show you those as well.
So the first one that we need to set is we need to set a variable.
So I set a variable of X and I set it to be zero.
And so this is the do loop.
And what I need to do with it the do is I need to increment X so lastly and the most important one.
So we've set a starting value for X..
We have we're doing something with X so that we can eventually break out of the loop.
And lastly the most important part most important expression that we need to add in the loop is we need
to set a breaking point.
And this is where we can use while.
So what we want to do is we want to continue to loop while X is less than 10.
And then once X is less than 10 then we're actually going to break out of the loop.
So let's put let's create our variable output and this one we're going to grab that element in the dog.
So it's a document get element by id and then we need to identify the element that we want to grab.
So we want to set up that inner HMO.
So as we're looping through we're going to put in her age to now and what we're going to do is we're
going to keep concatenating to it.
So we're going to add to the existing content.
And we want to put a value of x soulis to value x equals so we can see the value of x as we're looping
through.
And then also you add a line break.
So just some h t m l so we can differentiate between different iterations of the loop.
So we're all ready to go.
So let's try this out.
So we see that what gets put here is starting at the value of zero.
We continuously looped through the value of x.
So it puts set and increments X and then it gets this statement here where we've got while.
So this is our condition.
So just like the conditions that we saw earlier that while this condition is not true
and that's the point will it it will break the loop.
So this condition always has to be true or it's going to break out of the loop.
So we know at this point that it's gone through its own put X AMS let's let's do one work and we're
going to say final value of x.
So the final value of x.
What do you think the final value of x is.
And we seek we can quickly run through the code here.
So starting undervalues 0 we're looping it through where incrementing X here and then where we have
that condition while it's less than 10 was not less than an equal to 10.
While it's less than 10 and that's where we break out of the loop.
So do you think that it actually runs one more time increments x.
So do you think X will be 10 or do you think X will be 9.
So let's refresh the page and if you said X is 10 you're actually correct.
So what's happened here is because we've done the increment afterwards after that put here.
So this is why the value X is 10.
So order it is really important when especially when you're incrementing the value you're using that
value in output.
So what if I put it before that I would put statement.
What do you think the value of X is going to be do you think that the final value of X is going to be
equal to the last one that we're putting within the loop iteration let's refresh that and see what the
answer is.
So it is 10 and going through the code.
So you can see that we're starting at zero.
We enter in within the loop we immediately increment X by 1.
So at this point X heard one when we're doing the output we see the value of X gets put to one and then
we continue to loop through and we check to see if the condition is true and that we continue to go
back there.
So we're not going to actually do one more trip in increment x.
So the last time we incremented that X were outputting in 10 and we break the loop at this point because
the condition now is no longer true.
It's no longer less than 10.
So the condition is false.
And then we put the value.
So let's do an exercise now and what I want you to do for this exercise is to ask the user coming in.
So using a prompt asking for a value and ask how many times you want them where they want you to loop
through the code and output the value.
So let's give it a go.
And I did the prompt and then using the return value the prompt.
That's where you set the condition for the loop and limit the number of times that we iterate through
the loop and you keep the output the same.
Where we're outputting the value of x as we're doing our count and we're looping through.
So go ahead.
Open up here Ed..
Pause the video and create that prompt and then letting the user set the breaking point for the loop.
So we had an opportunity to try that out and let's just do one here called answer and prompt
and we'll ask how many times do you want me to loop
with a question mark at the end.
So now whatever the user is going to get prompted whenever they refresh the page they're getting a prompt
and they're going to get asked how many times they want to see this loop.
So all we have to do is take the value of answer and use that as our breaking point for you.
So answer any answer we can go out and refresh.
And now we're asked how many times do we want to do.
So now we can enter in whatever number we want and we'll see that the actual loop loops as many times
as we entered in there.
So we can enter in a really large number and probably not a great idea.
But it does work.
So you should have some type of limits.
And the other thing too as well we should also add in something where maybe we do a check to see if
the value is actually numeric.
So you can see here that even if I enter in something we actually still do that 1 loop through because
what's happening now is that we're still going into the code we're reading through it and the condition
actually isn't.
So we we do that do.
Which basically means and this is really important to know as well.
So even though we did actually have a numeric value that we rendered out we went through do we incremented
X we output the value of x and then we hit that condition.
And within this condition we know that answer I actually was holding a numeric value.
So basically the loop broke and we output the value there.
So it's important to note this that we did we did pick up a value with an answer but it wasn't numeric.
So the loop still ran and the condition broke ass out of the loop before it could run that second round.
So one thing I didn't want to note that we know that with prompts the actual value is going to be a
string value.
But javascript's flexible enough to work with it.
But realistically this should actually be updated to number just to make sure that we are actually using
a number value.
And we can also add in a condition that checks to see if
the type of values if we take number answer and let's use typeof.
So that's the one that we used before.
So we're converting number answer into a number of value.
So let's go ahead and convert the answer into a number value.
So the number answer.
So this will actually convert our street value into a number or numeric value in order to be able to
loop through there and then all we need to do is just make sure that this fund is answer as well.
So this is going to be using that value of answer.
Let me refresh it.
And now it's going to ask me how many times want to loop through in there.
So everything is working as before.
And I can open up the console and I can do.
Type of answer.
And we can see that now is the numbers.
That's the answer that we have given and we see that's taken in numeric format.
So what want you to do now for the challenge is to open up your editor and loop through numbers 0 to
30 and only output that even numbers.
So looping through all those numbers and I only want you to output within that inner each to Maol only
output those even numbers.
So I just give it a second and pause the video and try it for yourself and I'll show you the answer
coming up.
So you had the opportunity to try this out yourself.
So let's clean up some of this code.
We don't need answer any more.
So I can get rid of those ones and what we need to do is so we can set it starting at zero.
We want to loop through while X is less than 31 or we can say 30 it actually doesn't matter because
we only want to hit even numbers.
So while we're looping through the value of x and it's also important to know where we're placing the
X increment here.
So I'm going to leave that where it is.
And of course if I put that above and I did the conditional statement then we would have a different
value for x.
So coming in X starts at 0 but we already add one.
So it's already up to 1.
So we can actually it might actually be better that if we had it down here so we can start at zero.
So zero would be our first even number.
So now we need to add in that condition.
So let's take a look at the value of x and we'll look at X and we'll see if X
remember modulus so modulus gives us the ability to check if there is a remainder to a number.
So if we divide it by two we know that the number if we divide it by two and the remainder is zero.
We know that that number is even.
So we can put the value of x so we can just simply keep that statement that we have there and we're
going to put the value of x and then we're going to continuously loop through and we can leave this
one in as well.
So let's open up the browser let's refresh the page.
And now we see that we're starting at zero.
We've got two four six eight ten.
All of that even numbers all the way up to 30.
So that's the solution.
And then the next lesson we're going to look at while loops sort of are looked at the do while loop
and the wild loops are going to be slightly different.
So that's coming up in the next lesson.